>> (VOICEOVER) Humans
hundreds of thousands of years
as hunter-gatherers.
Then, suddenly, around 8,000
BC, we discovered civilization.
This anomaly was the subject of
an investigation commissioned
by NASA, which pointed
to a disturbing trend
in evolved civilizations
suddenly appearing completely
developed, and to technology,
agriculture, science,
mathematics, and astronomy
suddenly manifesting
in Mesopotamia, Egypt,
Yucatan, China, and Peru.
Did humans experience a
collective inspiration?
Or was civilization
inherited from someone else?
Because around the
same time, there
emerged stories of unusual
people, gods by any other name,
appearing out of nowhere,
each possessing great skills
far beyond the capability
of hunter-gatherers.
If so, who were these gods?
Were they connected?
And more importantly,
where did they come from?
There are close to 200
accounts from indigenous people
around the world describing a
global flood 11,000 years ago
and how it wiped out
most of the human race
as well as a parallel
race of unusual people,
human-like, but
not quite like us.
It also submerged the island
nations where these gods lived,
which is why it's been very
difficult to locate them up
until now.
But if you read the stories
together and observe
the similarities, you
get the impression
they are more like
eyewitness accounts.
And two homelands of the
gods are very familiar,
Atlantis and Lemuria.
But have we been so
obsessed with these two
that we've ignored other
equally-important locations
where a lost civilization of
antediluvian gods once dwelt?
(VOICEOVER) The
first question to ask
is, how do landmasses
just disappear?
Historians writing
about this topic
2,000 years ago were
much closer to events.
And they believed the Earth
can change dramatically
in the blink of an eye.
We don't even have to look so
far back to find missing lands.
Take the case of the St
Vincent islands still located
on naval charts in 1789 roughly
between Baja and Tahiti.
A ship's log gives an account
of 12 days spent there
and how the islands
were about 20 miles
in circumference, wooded,
and moderately elevated.
The next ship the sale
there 30 years later
spent 46 days surveying
the area yet found nothing
except this colored water
to a depth of 720 feet.
Then there's the
case of Davis island,
500 miles southwest of South
America, a landmass so large,
it stretched beyond the horizon
and was added to Naval charts
in 1687.
Now, 35 years later, a Dutch
captain, en route to Australia,
went looking for it.
But the island was no
longer above sea level.
And the captain
continued his journey
and stumbled upon Easter
Island by accident.
So his trip wasn't
a complete loss.
In fact, two other islands
existed near Easter Island
as late as 1912.
But were no longer
there 20 years later
despite a failed three-week
search by the US Navy.
(VOICEOVER) The
point is that Earth
is an unstable, unpredictable
evolving planet.
And so is the solar system.
Expert astronomers like the
Chaldeans and the Chinese
were under no illusion that
the orbits and velocities
of planets are
absolute but subject
to change and variation.
And they forewarned
future citizens
of the chaos such
changes periodically
bring upon the Earth,
one of them being
the obliteration of all
traces of former civilizations
by meteorites.
One event was recorded by
the Hopi, the Egyptians,
and the Tamil of southern India.
And it describes a displacement
of the poles, a time when
the Earth was upside down.
And the story
appears to take place
around 13,000 BC when
a catastrophe generated
what is called the Oldest Dryas,
the first of three ice ages.
And the myths are
remarkably consistent with
geologic and climatic data.
In a similar event in
10,800 BC, the Earth
was hit by a fragmented meteor,
which led to the third ice
age called the Younger Dryas.
And ancient cultures
claim this event
reversed the Earth's rotation.
An Egyptian priest
explained this
to a visiting Greek scholar
by the name of Solon.
And he said to this
man, there was a change
in the rising and the
setting of the sun
and the other heavenly bodies.
And those times, they
used to set in the quarter
where they now rise, and used
to rise where they now set.
At certain periods,
the Earth revolves
in the reverse direction.
And of all the changes which
take place in the heavens,
this reversal is the greatest
and the most complete.
(VOICEOVER) Solon would
take back to Greece
another Egyptian account, that
of a sunken continent where
the gods once
lived, which became
the foundation for Plato's
now-famous story of Atlantis.
The Younger Dryas cold spell
continued for 900 years
before Earth was again subjected
to a barrage of meteorites
around 9700 BC.
This event generated
a global flood.
The tsunami penetrated
Asia, reaching the Himalaya,
and into Tibet.
In the Pacific Northwest,
tribes experienced
waves crossing the Cascades,
Olympic, and Rocky Mountains.
At least three tribes
described their canoes
being dumped on the
summit of Mount Jefferson,
an elevation of 10,000 feet.
Evidence of the flood
is in the Great Salt
Lake in North America.
It is claimed that its
saltiness was acquired
from mineral salts
accumulating from rivers
over long periods of time.
But there's a problem
with this theory.
The Great Salt Lake
is full of sea salt.
And the changing salinity
occurred around the same time
that giant waves
overran the Rocky
Mountains and central
plains of North America.
(VOICEOVER) Survivors were few.
Along with world flood
myths are descriptions
of a pre-flood civilization
which architects
were magicians, builders of
impressive temples and cities
far beyond the capability
of cave dwellers.
Even they were not spared.
Nevertheless, groups of gods
appeared after the flood
at strategic locations,
each accompanied
by seven sages, or
craftspeople, to rebuild
the former world of the gods,
as ancient Egyptians wrote.
Echoes of this civilization
are everywhere.
In 1966, a row of stone
columns with inscriptions
was found 55 miles
off the coast of Peru,
6,000 feet below the
present sea level.
Then there are the
examples on land,
such as megaliths that are out
of proportion on tiny Pacific
islands.
Oddly enough, in
the 16th century,
the notion that these
islands are the remains
of a now-submerged continent
was a widely accepted idea based
on evidence gained by the
Portuguese navigator Pedro de
Queirós from islanders
he met on his travels.
And the lesson is this.
If we examine the traditions
of indigenous people
whose ancestors were closer
to the events than we are,
we gain a better understanding
of what our antediluvian
cousins were up to and how their
genius survives as a reminder
that civilization is not
linear but an ongoing, cyclical
experiment.
(VOICEOVER) Few have heard
of Easter Island's folklore
as recorded by its relatively
unknown early inhabitants,
the Waitaha, who describe
Easter Island as an archipelago.
This was many
thousands of years ago,
before the rising
level, when, they say,
the stars shone in a different
sky, in a different pattern.
Every year, the
Waitaha said they
welcomed the appearance of a
double hull canoe to the gods.
And they called them Urukehu.
Now, the Urukehu are
described as star walkers
and long distance voyagers who
traveled across the Pacific
to and from a place called
Kainga Nuinui, which
means "the enormous land."
And then, one year, the canoe
failed to return when, I quote,
"angry stars gathered
close to the moon
to give birth to the tides of
chaos, the dreaded deluge."
So this alone places
them on Easter Island
before 9700 BC, which is the
geological date of the Great
Flood.
(VOICEOVER) The Urukehu survived
titanic waves in the Pacific
and reached New Zealand.
Two generations after the
world turned by water,
a female descendant,
called Hotu Matua,
arrived back on Easter
Island with seven sages.
Hotu Matua was given
charge of mapping
the Pacific and its missing
lands, many of which
had become islands due to
rapidly rising sea levels,
including her own homeland.
And then other
descendants of the Urukehu
arrive from a
continent to the east,
where they'd lived for
a long period of time.
And these Urukehu are described
as tall, fair skinned,
red haired with green eyes,
and blond with blue eyes.
And their image is
said to be depicted
in the oldest Moai of
Easter Island, whose
extended chins portray beards.
While the cylinders
carved from red scoria
and balanced on their heads,
depict their unusual hair
color, at least the
people of the Pacific.
And even though the Waitaha
account is over 11,000 years
old, there is no mention
of caving the Moai.
The statues are already
an accepted presence
on the island, a testament
to their extreme antiquity.
And this is proved by the
location of the quarry, which
now lies 80 feet below
sea level, submerged
by the rising ocean at the
end of the Younger Dryas.
(VOICEOVER) After
the world turned
by water, the grandchildren
of the Urukehu set sail
from Easter Island to
locate the birthplace
of the gods, a remote mountain
region on New Zealand's South
Island.
The three sacred sites stand in
a place of unparalleled beauty.
Te Kohanga, also known
as the Sacred Nest,
was once surrounded by
a lake and resembled
a primordial island.
The second, Kura Tawhiti,
means "Distant School."
It was the academy
of the Urukehu,
with each stone set to hold
the wisdom of the gods.
Among the hundreds of
weathered limestone outcrops
stand other monoliths,
once shaped by human hands,
by the Keepers of Stone,
a group of stonemasons
whom the Waitaha as
able to shape stone
without breaking its spirit.
Oh, I recall the
first time I saw
these monoliths and
remarking how many of them
don't look natural.
They seem to be shaped by
human hands, but obviously,
very weathered.
And it was impossible to
prove until I read the Waitaha
tradition in which they describe
the carving of the stones,
particularly that of their
tutilary goddess, Marotini.
And their story goes like this.
"Huge are the monuments
we carved at Te Kohanga.
A towering column
of the purest stone
was shaped to place
Marotini in the land.
We ask so much of
the stone shapers
when they carved her to
stand against the stars.
Tall timbers and
thick ropes lifted
them high above the
land to carve Marotini.
Ever higher they
climbed to cut away
that curving charcoal
lines to reveal
the beauty of our ancestor."
(VOICEOVER) When might
the birthplace of the gods
have been established?
If Urukehu were already
navigating the Pacific long
before the flood,
ostensibly, they
could have been in New
Zealand before 10,000 BC.
The Waitaha narrative
describes a calendar stone
somewhere amid the
Birthplace of the Gods.
Since ancient
temples memorialize
the date of their creation
by referencing specific stars
or constellations,
if the calendar
stone could be located, it
would provide a date reference.
This worldwide practice
is called archeoastronomy.
I have spent a few
years hiking the ridges
of the Birthplace of the Gods.
But nothing resembling
a calendar stone really
stood out.
So I took my search
to a third bridge.
As if the views of the valley
aren't enough of a distraction,
there are also hundreds
of limestone outcrops
to choose from.
And many have clearly been
shaped by water, undoubtedly.
But as I approached
an escarpment,
the main sacred site
at Kura Tawahiti
came into view in the distance.
And at that moment, one monolith
stood out from the rest.
It didn't look like
an active erosion.
It looked like a kind of
sundial with a protrusion
resembling a head and a
faint image of eyes, nose,
and a mouth.
But best of all, the only
bird in the entire valley
was perched on this stone,
a falcon, of all things.
And had I been an
ancient Egyptian,
I would have said, Horace
is nodding in agreement.
And these coincidences
happen all the time
when researching
ancient mysteries.
So I figured this
was a good omen
and began taking
measurements of the sky.
So I stood in front
of the disk, with he
had aligned at the top ridge.
And I took a compass
bearing and altitude.
But what was I supposed
to be aligning it to?
Well, there are two
principal constellations
in the mythology of the Waitaha,
one being the Southern Cross.
So if we roll back the sky
to the time of the flood,
this constellation only begins
to appear above the stone
on the spring
equinox of 14,800 BC,
with the Milky Way,
this celestial river,
flowing vertically as though
pouring out of the stone.
The effect must
have been magical.
And this is correct,
then the Urukehu
who would have had
to have been there
before the start of
the Oldest Dryas.
But there's another possibility.
And that's a second
constellation
of note, which is Orion,
specifically its belt stars.
Now, Orion does not rise above
the background mountain range
for another 4,000 years,
until the spring equinox
of 10,800 BC, when its
belt aligns perfectly
with the calendar stone.
And the date happens to
coincide with a period
of meteorite impacts that
triggered the Younger Dryas.
But to see the
entire constellation,
one has to wait until
the equinox in 10,400 BC.
And I got goose bumps
when this date popped up.
Because it is commemorated at
several prominent monuments
around the world,
the most well-known
being the Pyramids of Giza,
which mirror the Belt of Orion
exactly on the same occasion.
Well, it turns
out that there are
a number of overlapping
relationships between the gods
of Egypt and the Urukehu.
(VOICEOVER) At the same time
that Orion appears fully
above the calendar the stone,
across the valley at Kura
Tawhiti, the goddess Marotini
stares at the rising Southern
Cross.
This dual reference
offers a high probability
that the Urukehu were
commemorating this date
at the Birthplace of the Gods.
The Waitaha narrative
describes that, whenever
the Urukehu returned
from New Zealand,
they would bypass Easter
Island due to the behavior
of the ocean currents, visiting,
instead, the place of ancestors
in the great lands in the east.
Whenever they undertook
this long voyage,
they took to totem birds
with them, Titi and Caca.
Together, they give the
name to another homeland
of the gods,
Titicaca, the location
of the temple city of Tiwanaku.
In order to understand
ancient places,
it is useful to
turn to etymology,
particularly the earliest
iterations of a name.
Because it often reveals a true
meaning, a purpose or an event.
And in the altiplano of
Bolivia, the oldest languages
are Puquina and Aymara.
And the syllables
"Ti-wa-na-ku" mean "my people."
Except that the syllable
"aku" is not Aymara.
It is Egyptian.
And it means "shining being."
So Tiwanaku becomes "the
place of my shining people."
(VOICEOVER) We'll return
to them in a moment.
Tiwanaku is composed
of six known
temples covering 2,000 acres.
Its adjacent temple,
Puma Punku, is
packed with advanced
masonry, each stone above
and beyond the skill of cavemen,
even latter-day stonemasons.
But how can we tell
if these temples
were built before the flood?
The focus of excavations by the
archaeologist Arthur Posnansky
was a quadrangle of
monolithic standing
stones called the Kalasasaya.
And he noted how the alignment
was off by 18 degrees
relative to the sun
along the horizon.
And this is due to the effects
of the Earth's rotation
and tilt, which causes
the stars to appear
in a different part of the sky
over the course of millennia.
It's a phenomenon
called procession.
So was Posnansky
recalculated the correlation
between the stones
and the solstices.
And his figures
were peer reviewed
by a group of mathematicians
and deemed to be correct.
This massive quadrangle was
built, according to Posnansky,
in 15,000 BC.
(VOICEOVER) But
there's something else.
Relative to its
adjacent temples,
the Kalasasaya appears
to have been forced
to fit a pre-existing plan.
Because the three
adjacent sites,
the Akapana mound, the
semi-subterranean temple,
as well as Puma Punku, are all
offset by a further 3 degrees.
They reference a
very different sky.
And given the greater
depth of sedimentation,
it is likely these three
sides are even older.
It takes the Earth 21,600
years to tilt three degrees
on its axis.
If this correlation is
correct, then these three sites
could be as old as 36,000 BC.
And as extreme as
this date may sound,
there is another
link with Egypt here.
The Egyptian King lists,
stated in the Turin papyrus,
begins around 36,000
BC, a fact that
was shared with Greek historians
when they visited Egypt
over 3,000 years ago.
And Posnansky himself
was also of the opinion
that Tiwanaku was
built and rebuilt
over three different
stages, with the Akapana,
the semi-subterranean temple,
and Pumapunku referencing
a truly remote era, followed
by the Kalasasaya, and then
a rebuilding of the site
after it was destroyed
by a colossal wall of water
that came from the tipping
over of lake Titicaca.
The only catastrophe we
know that was capable
of such destruction
was the Great Flood
at the end of the Younger Dryas.
(VOICEOVER) So who
were the gods who built
the temple complex of Tiwanaku?
And more to the point, who was
responsible for its rebuilding?
The local Puquina still
teach their oral tradition
of having fled to the Andes
after a flood sank their island
continent in the Pacific.
And they called it
Lupakije, also known as Mu,
or as it became known, Lemuria.
And their story says
that the temples
were rebuilt after the flood
that by the god man Viracocha
along with his seven
Hayhuaypanti, which
means sages,
craftspeople, one of whom
was both his wife and sister.
Now, interestingly, this
is a shared observation all
around the world wherever the
gods alighted after the flood.
Hayhuaypanti translates as
"Shining Ones," the people
for whom Tiwanaku was named.
These seafaring gods
appeared from the Pacific.
They were described as very
tall, white skinned, bearded,
red haired, and were associated
with a symbol of the serpent.
They were also defined by
their elongated skulls.
Oh, a treasure trove of
skulls was found at Paracas
on the coast of Peru.
And compared to human
skulls, these elongated heads
have a 25% larger
cranial capacity.
And although human skulls are
known to have been artificially
shaped by parents, wishing their
children to grow up looking
like the gods, artificially
shipping a skull cannot
increase its cubic capacity.
And furthermore, the
origins of their DNA
leads to the region of
the Black Sea, the Middle
East, and Egypt.
So might Viracocha and
his seven Shining Ones
have been of
Egyptian provenance?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Edfu, a temple dedicated
to the falcon god Horus.
Written on its walls
are the building texts.
They describe how
a group of gods
called Akhu Shemsu Hor began
arriving along the Nile
after a catastrophe partially
sank their homeland, Ta Neteru,
an island somewhere in the
region of the Indian Ocean.
The event coincides
with the incident
that caused the Younger
Dryas around 10,800 BC.
They also had another
base, Iw Titi,
possible reference
to Lake Titicaca
and its Island of the Sun.
The Akhu Shemsu Hor established
a series of sacred mounds
along the Nile that became the
foundations of future temples.
The timing coincided
with an anomaly
in this region, an
agricultural revolution
that appeared out of
nowhere in the Nile valley
around 10,500 BC.
The texts say that
within 800 years,
a second disaster sank
the primeval island
of the gods for good,
whereupon one group
of survivors returned to Egypt,
seven sages led by an eighth,
a charismatic leader called Hor.
These were the Akhu
Shemsu Hor, which
means "Shining Ones,"
followers of Horus.
Like in other
parts of the world,
they, too, are described
as between 8 and 1/2
to 10 feet tall, light
skinned, with elongated skulls.
And just as Viracocha
in South America,
their stated task was to
rebuild the former mansions
of the gods.
What mansions might they have
come to rebuild in Egypt?
Oh, I love the building texts.
They describe the first
appearance of the Shining Ones,
the followers of Horus,
as the first occasion.
And the date is memorialized
in the alignment
of the pyramids of Giza in the
spring equinox of 10,400 BC.
But there is at least one
site that may be contemporary.
(VOICEOVER) The
Osirion at Abydos
has always been regarded
as an underground temple.
But it is actually encased
in 40 feet of silt,
deposited inch by
inch by the Nile
when the river reached
the temple's doorstep,
and the regional climate
was wetter, the period
between 10,500 to 7,000 BC.
By 3,500 BC, the Nile had moved
over a mile east of Abydos.
Pharaohs were still building
temples around the Osirion,
yet none related to it,
as though the building was
no longer visible,
covered by sand and silt.
All that remained
was the memory of why
the location was important.
Then, in 1300 BC, Seti
I built his own temple
aligned to the same
axis as the Osirion.
Yet his masterpiece
stopped short
of the underground
structure and bends
to the left, in total
contradiction to temple
protocol, leaving its
most important room,
the holy of holies,
decapitated from the body.
The only reasonable
explanation is
that the weight
of his own temple
broke through the ceiling of
the now-underground structure.
Could it be that Seti
rediscovered the Osirion
and wished to revive
its importance?
A clue lies in a
room built by Seti
featuring a revealing panel
about the Osirion's namesake,
the god man of Osiris.
Osiris is the hero who is
dismembered before he ascends
the Milky Way towards
the Origin of Souls,
typically, the pole star.
And he returns resurrected as
Horus in the form of a hawk.
And Osiris is also the
earthly embodiment of Orion.
Now, curiously,
Seti's own temple
is not reference
the rising of Orion,
nor any other star
for that matter,
another violation of protocol.
It seems to me that this
pharaoh wished the Osirion
to be the focal point.
And yet the Osirion does
not reference Orion either,
as one would expect for a
temple whose presiding god is
the earthly embodiment
of this constellation.
However, Egyptian texts refer
to as Osiris's consort, Isis,
as the hawk of Osiris.
And on this panel, she is
depicted as a kite hawk
with outstretched wings,
demonstrating her ability
to fan the breath of immortality
into those she oversaw.
For this to occur,
the soul of the hero
must reside in the
region of regeneration,
which is the pole star, which is
protected by seven circumpolar
stars called the
indestructibles.
Now, "indestructible"
is also a metaphor
of the regeneration of
the soul as exemplified
by the journey taken by Osiris
and performed at the Osirion.
So perhaps we should be looking
for a hawk in the night sky
in connection with this temple.
(VOICEOVER) In ancient
Egypt, the star Deneb
was one of the seven
indestructibles.
Its host constellation
is Cygnus.
Back in the day, Cygnus
was not regarded as a swan,
as it is today, but as a hawk.
And therein lies the
connection with Osiris,
the wife who
resurrects his soul,
and the date when that
temple might have been built.
If we roll back the
sky, Cygnus the hawk
finally appears at the
entrance of the Osirion
in perfect ascent,
riding up the Milky
Way, this celestial river,
towards the location
of the souls, with its
brightest star, Deneb,
aligning with the
axis of the temple.
This astonishing
event took place
on the winter solstice and
spring equinox of 10,500 BC.
We now have the
Shining Ones present
before and after the flood
in both Egypt and the Andes.
Both groups are described
as master seafarers
and astronomers.
Both sites feature shared
megalithic construction
methods, even anomalies.
And in turn, Viracocha
and his seven Shining Ones
resembled the Urukehu gods of
New Zealand and Easter Island,
the same red-haired,
seafaring astronomers who
employed identical building
methods throughout the Pacific.
As for the Urukehu, they may
be the same followers of Horus.
Because both their leaders were
navigators and astronomers.
And both held the
title Net of the World
for their ability to
map the rearranged lands
after the flood.
And they are depicted as
such in the temple of Edfu.
And furthermore, all the above
were associated with Orion.
There are too many overlapping
criteria linking the flood gods
in different corners
of the world,
making it highly probable
that they aren't one
and the same group of people.
(VOICEOVER) Could they
also have in presence
in the Mediterranean?
11,000 years ago,
a stonemason living
between Tunisia and Sicily cut
a 39 foot monolith, drilled
parallel holes, transported
it a quarter of a mile,
and placed it upright.
Now, it lies 130 feet below
the Mediterranean Sea.
The attached shells
are dated to 9,300 BC,
meaning that the menhir
was placed on dry land
before the catastrophic rise
in sea level after the flood.
The rising Mediterranean
radically affected
nearby Malta, cutting
it off from Sicily,
and turning it into an island.
And Malta is home to
miles of parallel grooves
resembling cart ruts,
except that some
show signs of having
been artificially
carved rather than created
by repetitive use of wheels.
On the south side
of the island, they
reached the edge of the cliff.
They dropped 600 feet.
Continue under
the Mediterranean,
then reappear on the summit
of an island three miles away.
The land bridge that once
connected the two islands
collapsed when great
pressure was placed upon it.
Now, if early Roman
historians are correct,
this pressure was the result
of titanic waves traveling
from the west from the
direction of the Atlantic
before smashing into Malta.
Perhaps.
What is certain is that by 7,600
BC, the grooves were submerged.
Could the same tidal
waves have been
responsible for dumping 7,000
people, animals, and utensils
into the hypogeum
of Hal Saflieni,
including hundreds of
long-haired people?
By this point, I had
developed a theory
based on accumulated evidence
that the flood gods lived
in seclusion on islands,
including Tiwanaku,
which was designed like an
artificial island on Lake
Titicaca.
And only through
necessity, brought
about by severe
climatic changes,
were they forced to move
to continental areas
and interact with
ordinary people.
Now, this hypothesis fits
in well with the hundreds
of flood stories which mentioned
the surviving gods arriving
by boat from their
drowned lands.
(VOICEOVER) Was Malta home
to such a reclusive society?
The archipelago features a
disproportionate concentration
of temples resembling no
other, as though belonging
to an isolated culture,
temples like Ggantija,
the Tower of the Giantess.
Ggantija appears out
of nowhere, fully
developed, without
precedent, without
a trial-and-error stage.
All the stones are megalithic.
But on top, we find inferior
stones, sloppy of construction,
as though rehabbed after
a major conflagration.
The thing is, all
Maltese temples
demonstrate the kind
of erosion only made
possible by prolonged exposure
to wet weather, which,
in this region, occurred in the
epoch of 10,000 to 8,000 BC.
Now, Malta shares the
same climatic footprints
as the Giza Plateau.
And the temples
adjacent to the pyramids
show exactly the same
pattern of erosion
by enormous volumes of water.
(VOICEOVER) Might the
Maltese temples share
the same era as the
underwater monolith?
To test this idea, let's
look at the archaeoastronamy
of Ggantija.
The temple features
two misaligned axes,
as though tracking two
related yet separate objects
simultaneously.
The view of the
horizon is of a hill
that has been deliberately
flattened, as though serving
some astronomical function.
As the sky rolls
backwards through time,
no alignments are obvious until
the era of 12,000 BC, when,
on the spring equinox,
the first axes marks
the positions of a
major lunar standstill,
while the second axis
marks the sunrise.
Another place where unusual
parallel grooves are found
is the Azores.
And they too run to the edge
of cliffs and into the ocean.
And the Azores
archipelago is, of course,
the favorite candidate
for Atlantis.
And even discounting
a major subsidence
in the mid-Atlantic ridge due
to damage from meteorite impacts
and rising sea
levels, the Azores
were still a formidable
island chain 11,000 years ago.
And if you take the
bathymetric maps of the region,
they even bear a resemblance
to the continent once described
and depicted on ancient maps.
(VOICEOVER) It is said
Atlantis sank in three stages,
each following a natural
catastrophe, which
sounds uncannily like a
description of the three
catastrophes that generated
each of the Dryas events.
If so, we should find
evidence of dry land
along the mid-Atlantic ridge
from before the first event.
At the beginning, we
asked, could a landmass
sink in the blink
of a geological eye?
As history shows all
too often, yes, it can.
But an island the
size of a continent?
Well, a local dredging operation
in the Azores in the 1970s
recovered rocks at a
depth of 6,000 feet,
showing signs of
exposure to oxygen,
while sediment taken from
the mid-Atlantic ridge
revealed the remains
of freshwater plants
and beach sand created
along an ancient shoreline,
indicating the Azores was still
above sea level in 15,000 BC.
So now the question is, what
happened to its civilization?
Well, a funny thing happened
when I landed in the Azores
on the way to Lisbon.
A headline in the
morning newspaper
said, "Silva discovers
underwater pyramid."
It's amazing how
much work one can do
while sleeping on an airplane.
Well, it turns
out, it wasn't me.
It was another local
man by the same name who
discovered a 180 foot tall
step pyramid perfectly aligned
to the compass points, as
most pyramids tend to be,
and 120 feet below sea level.
The Portuguese navy
investigated the claim
and said Silva was mistaken, his
sonar images captured nothing
more than a sea mount,
perfectly aligned to grid north,
and in the shape
of a step pyramid.
It's astonishing what
nature and erosion can do.
And later, it transpires
that the navy did not
follow Silva's GPS
coordinates but searched
the wrong area, to
which they replied,
Silva had the wrong coordinates
because his equipment
was faulty.
Now, isn't it amazing
how, for 20 years,
this fisherman managed
to sail in the middle
of a volatile ocean, out
of sight of land, yet
managed to return
safely home each time.
You'd think that the bunkers
land to make up better stories.
(VOICEOVER) Who might the
Atlantean gods have been?
The first landmass to the east
of the Azores is Portugal.
The oldest myths of the region
describe a great inundation
and the sinking
of a great island
from which emerged a
group of unusual people
called Offiusa, the
People of the Serpent.
Meanwhile, to the west,
several groups of wise people
arrived in boats on
the coast of Yucatan.
The local tradition
states they migrated
from stepping stone to
stepping stone from the east.
In other words, they hopped
from island to island,
all that remained of their
drowned homeland called Atl.
The sacred book Chilam
Balam puts the date
to their arrival at
9,600 BC, the same date
given by the Egyptians for
the sinking of Atlantis.
The collective
name of these gods
was the Itz, meaning
"sorcerer," "magician."
And their title of
sacred office was
the Kanuul, which means the
"People of the Serpents."
And it has nothing
to do with snakes.
The symbolism implies people
who understood and control
the forces of
electromagnetism, what
science called telluric
forces, or telluric currents.
And they refer to the land
where they disembarked,
Yucatan, as Mayab,
"the Land of the Few,"
in recognition of the
survivors of the flood.
And in time, their
progeny would be called
Maya, which means "water."
Now, the Itz are described by
the Maya teachers as architects
of the sky who
spoke [NON-ENGLISH],,
"the Language of Light."
Paints quite a
picture, doesn't it?
And they're said to have arrived
in three groups of seven,
each led by an eighth, a
charismatic leader, one of whom
was called Itzamna.
He was tall, light-skinned,
with Caucasian features,
and a long beard, as were the
other two leaders, Kukulkan
and Quetzalcoatl.
The Itz moved across
Yucatan, establishing
temple cities like Chichen
Itza, which bears their name,
and Tikal and Uxmal,
whose temples reflect
the architecture of the cosmos.
These were astral
academies, each building
encoded with their knowledge
of mathematics, science,
and astronomy,
information brought
from a submerged homeland and
hardwired into huge monuments
to ensure its survival
in future cataclysms.
In time, the buildings expanded
into the temples we see today.
The Its continued inland
and into the mountains
of Guatemala, understandably
far from the ocean.
Eventually, they
settled on a lake
called Atitlan, named for
their sunken island home,
where they built a
city called Utatlan
as a replica of the
one they'd lost.
>> Their other main center of
activity was on Lake Peten Itza
on the island of Nojpeten.
And it means great island.
Although, a much larger
island exists nearby.
Now, what made this
island great was
that it was their
main spiritual center,
a scaled down version
of their lost Atl,
or Atitlan, featuring 21
temples and a step pyramid.
There's no trace of any
temple on Nojpeten today,
all destroyed by
the Spanish, who
used the temples as a
quarry for their own houses.
And even the name was
changed to Flores.
But why not use the bigger
island next door, I wondered?
Well, perhaps the smaller
island's strategic view
of the horizon down
the neck of the lake
had something to do
with their decision.
So I decided to find out.
I reasoned that
the Great Pyramid
must have stood where
the main church does
today, standard Catholic
practice back in the day.
But how do you find out?
Well, first, the standard
practice for the church
was to align its
buildings east to west
to commemorate Christ's
death around the equinox.
Now, when they don't
follow this protocol
it is proven again and again
that an original temple
lies beneath.
And in this case,
the church of Flores
is not aligned in due east,
but towards the southeast.
Clearly superimposed upon
something much older.
Secondly, when I
asked the priest
to see the stones
of the pyramid which
formed the foundation
of the building
he booted me out in no uncertain
terms out of that church.
That's a sure sign you're
close to the honey pot.
Now, the rest was
purely academic.
From the church's
vantage points you
get an unobstructed
view of the horizon
down the neck of the lake.
And in 7,600 BC
the winter solstice
would have been aligned to
the nine-tier pyramid that
once stood on this location.
According to the Maya, central
American temple tradition
is the continuation of
Atitlan, the rebuilding
of the former world of the gods.
One clue lies in the
Maya serpent dynasty,
which covers 16,000
years, and most likely
originated in Aticlan
before continuing in Yucatan
after the flood.
Another is the age of
the original temples.
They are built like
layers of an onion,
growing organically,
and adapting
to the changes in the
movements of the planets
and stars they track.
A recent excavation
on the corner
of the pyramid of
Kukulkan at Chichen Itza
reveals an older layer, which
traditions claim was originally
built by a serpent priest.
Is the Maya dynasty so old?
358 cave systems were recently
found near the temple of Tulum,
a submerged world filled with
the remains of enormous sloths,
proto elephants, extinct
fauna, and Maya artifacts
and skeletons, all trapped
by rising seas by 8,000 BC,
validation that the
Maya were already
established in the
Yucatan in remote times,
and witnessed the arrival of the
Its from their sunken homeland.
And yet the people
of the serpent
were present on the other
side of the world too.
It's a strange
coincidence that Itzamna
is a compound name of
Itzanami and Izanagi,
who were the builders
of civilization
after the flood in
Japan around 8,000 BC.
And here they are known as
Nagi, the people of the serpent.
Two such flood
heroes, Nuwa and Fuxi,
founded the Chinese
dragon bloodline.
And this same dynasty
encompasses Indo-China,
Polynesia, and
particularly Fiji and India
where they are called
Naga, the serpent people.
No matter where you travel
in this part of the world,
traditions describe
heroes emerging
from a flood, accompanied
by seven Rishi, sages
who instructed humans
on civilization,
built megalithic structures,
and to all intents and purpose,
behaved like
magicians, always very
tall, light skinned, with blonde
or red hair, and long beards.
The region where all of
these stories, people, names,
and attributes converge
is upper Mesopotamia,
where we find another kind
of missing land, the lost
hill of Gobekli Tepe.
Gobekli Tepe was
rediscovered in the 1990s.
It is an artificial
mountain containing
at least 50 elliptical
enclosures, featuring standing
stones as tall as 19 feet.
The average carbon-14
dating of the site
is 9,984 BC, placing much
of it before the flood.
However, the samples were
taken from the walls,
which obscure important
carvings on the pillars.
Therefore, they were not
integral to the site.
The walls were added
later, after the temple
ceased to function.
To get a sense of when
it might have been built
we turn again to the stars.
Enclosure D is the most studied,
perhaps because its pillars are
the most decorated.
It has been suggested
that its alignment is
to the northern
setting of Cygnus.
But there's a small
problem with this theory.
This enclosure sits 30 feet
below the summit, which
obscures one's line of vision.
And secondly, the
ancients rarely, if ever,
celebrated descent of
a celestial object.
Only its rising or mid heaven
elevation was celebrated.
So perhaps a
re-evaluation is in order.
If we take the era of the
earliest carbon-14 dating,
which is 10,290 BC, a number
of things begin to emerge.
In the northern
sky at this time,
Vega was still
considered the pole star.
A view from enclosure D on the
winter solstice of 10,400 BC
would have seen Vega
in elliptical rotation
around the celestial pole.
And its movement is framed
by the two central pillars.
Now, Vega's appearance
after sunset
is actually marked by pillar
43, the one carved with vultures
moving around the circle.
Vega's name derives from Waki,
meaning falling or swooping,
referring to a time when
the movement of its host
constellation, Lyre,
resembled a swooping vulture.
So the pillar accurately
depicts the behavior
of this star around
the celestial pole.
But we're missing the best part.
Enclosure D's clear line of
vision is to the southeast.
Now, with Vega
visible to the north,
to the south the belt
of Orion rises briefly
above the horizon on
the winter solstice,
its narrow arc framed
by pillars 19 and 33,
with pillar 32 marking
its highest ascension
in the era of 10,400 BC.
So this reference to
Orion in 10,400 BC
raises very important
issues, specifically
with regard to Giza, where
the same relationship
takes place on the same date.
This is where the
understanding of place names
comes in very useful.
The original name of
Gobekli Tepe is Portasar.
An Armenian word breaks
into two syllables.
Port is an umbilical
cord, or navel.
And Asar is the
original name of Osiris.
Therefore, the hill is the
umbilical cord of Osiris.
As we said earlier, Osiris
is the earthly embodiment
of Orion, and his
dwelling place is Giza.
So we have a name
association and a date
connecting two locations.
But what could this umbilical
cord be referring to?
Well, if you take a
line from the corner
of the pyramid
attributed to Menkaure
and draw it through the corner
of the one attributed to Khufu,
you arrive at Portasar,
the second dwelling
place of Osiris.
So the name is giving us
a geodetic clue suggesting
that the two sites are linked.
Now, what does this tell
us about the architects
of Portasar?
The hill's deliberate
southeastern exposure
offers a sightline to an
ancient astronomical tower
in the town of Harran.
There has been human activity
here since at least 8,000 BC.
Back then it was called Har
Anu, which translates roughly
as the enclosure of Anu.
But who was Anu?
In Mesopotamian tradition,
a scribe by the name
Enmed Ur Annu wrote
down his encounters
with people of his
lineage, the lords of Anu.
The accounts took place hundreds
of years before the flood.
These antediluvian
gods were known
as Anunaki, the people of Anu.
In India, they were
also known as Anu-nage,
the people of the serpent.
The scribe's name was likely
changed by the Hebrews
to Enoch.
He describes the
Anunaki as having
unusually white
skin, which seems
to have been sensitive
to the sunlight,
because they're often
applying oil to it,
giving their skin a
shining appearance, hence
the nickname, Shining Ones.
But the nickname also
defines their status
as enlightened people.
So essentially, the Anunaki
are the same gods as Viracocha
and his Shining
Ones in the Andes,
the same as the Kanuul
of Central America,
the Offiusa of
Portugal, the Urukehu
of Easter Island and New
Zealand, and, of course,
the Egyptian Shining Ones,
the followers of Horus.
And this incredible
string of dots
continues with the
gods who assisted
the Hopi escape their
sinking land in the Pacific
during the flood.
And they called them
the red ant people.
And the phrase comes
from the two Hopi words
for ants and reddish
sand, Anu and Naki.
We are looking at one
international group of sages,
human like and yet
not entirely human,
whose seafaring
skills enabled them
to move from home to
home across the oceans
as easily as you and I
go to the supermarket.
which may explain why there
is so much Egyptian vocabulary
throughout Polynesia.
For example, an island
in Fiji called Raiatea,
the white skinned people of Ra.
In the Solomon Islands, there
is Isatabu, the restricted,
sacred abode of Isis.
And, of course,
while there exist
identical megalithic
building techniques,
stretching like an
umbilical cord from Egypt
through the Central Pacific,
and all the way to the Andes.
But what of the lords of Anu?
Well, these gods oversaw
seven groups of seven lords.
They were referred
to as Apkallu, sages.
And their nickname was watchers.
Now, the watchers were demonized
in biblical texts purely
for political reasons.
But in the original
story, they are largely
seen as helpers of
humanity, a fact
acknowledged by Native
American cultures
who called them
lookers, messengers
who were instrumental in
helping the Hopi escape
their sunken Pacific island
after the Great Flood
back in the days when they
were called Hisat-Sinom,
or as we know them, Anasazi.
Throughout Mesopotamia,
the watchers
were depicted by
figurines called
Mezre, which were placed at
the corners of sacred buildings
to ward off evil spirits.
The name means watchers
and awakened ones,
a metaphor indicating their
qualities as guardians as well
as enlightened people.
It stands to reason that
if the watchers were even
being used as talismans to
protect buildings from harm,
they would hardly have been
evil people as the Bible would
have us believe.
The lords of Anu
and the watchers
were distinguishable
from humans insofar
as they possessed knowledge
of the mechanics of nature,
and how to manipulate it.
Thus, they were
compared to gods.
And this was also the
view of the Egyptians, who
referred to them both as
Urshu, which means watchers,
and Neterw, a force
of nature, a god.
And in addition to their shining
skin, they were also very tall.
Mesopotamian tradition hints
that the flood gods lived
in seven secluded locations.
So far in this program
we have identified
Atitlan, Lapukije, also
known as Mu and Lemuria,
Kainga Nui in the Pacific, the
birthplace of the gods in New
Zealand, and Titicaca.
The assembly of the
lords of Anu itself
is said to have been on a
high mountain called Ardis,
speculated to have existed in
the region between the Black
and Caspian Seas.
The lords of Anu, these
people of the serpent,
they were said to live in
a compound called Garsuag,
but it's never been
properly located.
That is, until I
met the last wisdom
keeper from a hard to
find island in the Pacific
called Tongareva, one
of the Cook Islands.
And he shared with me
his peoples' tradition
that a group of gods
arrived from the Middle East
around 3,000 BC.
They were said to be great
sages, star navigators,
and intelligent people, red
haired, fair skinned, shining
people who belonged to a very
ancient lineage of wisdom
keepers called Tuanake,
better known to us as Anunaki.
Now, the wisdom
keeper also told me
this group were present
throughout the Pacific
far earlier, around the
time of the global flood.
Specifically on Easter Island
and one sacred platform
there still carries their name,
Ahu Hananakou Interestingly,
Ahu is a variant of
the Egyptian Aku,
as in Aku Shemsu Hor,
the Shining Ones,
the followers of Horus.
But Tongarevan
tradition further states
that the original homeland
of the lords of Anu
was an island nation
in the Indian Ocean
by the name Te Petaka.
It is described as a
secluded, circular island,
which sank during a great
cataclysm 11,000 years ago.
And the region
around it was totally
transformed to the point
where the island is
no longer visible, because when
parts of the Indian Ocean sank,
others rose.
So this missing land of the gods
existed in the general region
where today stands
the Arabian Peninsula.
Interestingly, this is
the same general location
of the homeland of the gods
alluded to by the Egyptians,
an island of fire.
So somewhere in this region
is another missing homeland
of the Shining Ones, the
people of the serpent,
Anunaki, watchers,
Viracochas, and so on.
Two pieces of
circumstantial evidence
point to these flood gods,
these master seafarers
and astronomers who once lived
on this island, who set out
to hand humanity the
art of civilization
after the world was turned
upside down 11,000 years ago.
The first is a
monument in Abu Dhabi.
It is totally out of
character for the region.
But a visitor from
the Andes would
look at its style
of construction
and believe they were still
back home, or Egypt, or Easter
Island, for that matter.
The other piece of
evidence is papyrus 1115.
Papyrus 1115 describes
the voyage of a sailor
down the Red Sea and
into the Indian Ocean.
And the ship is
caught in a storm.
All hands perish,
except the narrator,
of course, who is shipwrecked
on what he believes
to be a deserted island.
Now, eventually he
meets the leader
of the island, who gives
him food and a boat
and returns him home to Egypt.
Now, it is not known when
this account took place.
It is extremely old,
thousands of years old.
However, as he
embarks, the leader
tells the sailor, this
will be the last time he'll
see the island, because
soon it will vanish,
consumed by a
rising of the ocean.
The sailor then
offers a description
of the unusual person
who ruled this island,
a serpent with deep
blue eyes and a beard.
It seems this ancient
mariner is giving us
a glimpse of one of
the many flood gods who
went by the title people of
the serpent, not to mention one
of the missing lands where
these helpers of humanity
once held a great and memorable
civilization before teaching us
how to create our own.
Now, the idea that we suddenly
discovered the accouterments
of civilization around 8,000
BC doesn't seem so far-fetched.
[MUSIC PLAYING]